So Z-Index sets the stacking
order of elements and
it takes a couple of different values,
can take auto,
the keyword auto can take an integer,
or can take a global value like inherit.
Here's a CodePen I'm gonna take
you to Skellington the slides.
Here we've got a div with
a class of container.
We got four blocks inside of it here.
So, each block, there's a block
class that is setting the width and
height explicitly.
And then each color is
gonna set the background.
Each class that has a color name will
set the background to a different
color, right?
So ignore the position for now.
We're not gonna worry about position.
What I want to do is show
you the stacking order.
So right now, they all have
a stacking order index, or z-index 0.
They start out at 0.
So the yellow square here is on top.
It's defined last in our code here.
If I set z-index of -1, well, now it's
gonna come behind all of the other
elements because the other elements have a
z-index of 0, so they'll sit on top of it.
And if I want the red one to be on top,
I can give it a z-index of 2 or
even a z-index of 1, right?
Because zero is a default.
So this is a way that you can layer
elements into your UI regardless of how
it's structured in your code and
your HTML code.
Okay, we go back to this.
Now, I just mentioned
it to ignore position.
Position is something that I struggled
with immensely when I started out,
it was very confusing for
me to understand.
So I'm hoping that this
explanation will suffice.
So, position sets how an element
is positioned in a document.
We can set top, right, bottom, and
left values to assign it in
accordance with the position.
But let's look at this.
And again, these are not cumulative.
There are other values for position.
These are the most frequently used.
So a position of static.
The element is positioned according
to the normal document flow.
So the top, right, bottom and
left the properties,
they won't have an effect on an element
with a position of static, right?
So if we've got two boxes and we set
the red box to have a position of static,
it's gonna stay where it is.
Let me, Open this.
So we set position of static,
we can see the red boxes to find first,
blue boxes to find second.
Position of static does not change,
where it's located stays the same.
And you can see top and left,
that has no effect on that element.
Position relative.
So that element is positioned according
to the normal document flow, but
it's offset relative to where
it normally would show up.
So this is where top, right, bottom,
and left will come into play.
So if we go back here, let's set a
position on relative on this red box here.
So comment this out.
It's position relative.
There we go, that's why.
There was a top value
set on the box class.
Okay, so
we set position relative on the box.
It's rendered normally where it would be,
right?
But let's say we wanna shift it
down into the right 20 pixels.
We can do that using top 20 pixels,
left 20 pixels.
It's saying take the top and the left and
shift them 20 pixels to the right,
20 pixels down.
So that's what relative does.
It's relative to where it
normally would show up.
Absolute is interesting.
So it's gonna remove the element
from the normal document flow.
And it's gonna be positioned relative
to its closest positioned ancestor.
So what does that mean?
Let's go back in here.
So let's change this to position absolute,
and I'm gonna comment these out.
So position absolute, okay,
we're only seeing the red box.
Why is that?
That's a little strange?
Because we're setting position
absolute on this red box,
it's being removed from the DOM
the normal flow and as a result,
the blue box underneath it is being
rendered in its place, right?
It's filling the spot where the red
one normally would have gone.
But because position
absolute is removing it,
it's also setting the z-index to be
higher, so it's gonna sit on top And
that's why we're seeing it,
only the red box.
The blue box is being rendered where
the red one should have been, but
the red one is now higher
in the stacking order.
So if we set top and
left again now, on the red box,
we can see they're both there.
Blue is pretending that
red does not exist.
And top and left have moved
the position of this red box.
But what's weird, why is it so
close to this border here?
Like we're trying to make it 20
pixels to the right, 20 pixels down.
So why is it so close to this container?
And that's because we haven't set
a position on the container here.
This container does not
have position relative, so
what's happening is that this
red box is being positioned in
relation to this body,
the body of the render.
It's being positioned relative to the
viewport or the rendering of the UI here.
So in order to fix that, we want this
positioned relative to its container.
The container has to have
a position of relative.
So now it's being respected
from the container,
as opposed to the entire viewport there.
If you're wondering why you're seeing
a little like sliver of blue here,
that's because we've set 24 pixels
of padding on the container.
And so, we're getting a tiny bit
of overlap because we've said 20,
move this down 20 by 20, but
there's 24 pixels of padding.
So that's why you're seeing
that little sliver there.
There is a great use case for this.
And that is tool tips.
So when you hover over this,
you want a tool tip to display, right?
This is a pretty common paradigm.
So we've got a div, that's the container.
We've got a paragraph that says,
hover over me.
We've got a tool tip.
So we want this tooltip to be
positioned relative to the container,
we want it to show up relative to what's
already in here to this paragraph here.
So I'm not gonna run through
this example in depth here.
I just wanted to point out that it's very
common practice to use position absolute
and have the container have a position of
relative when you're trying to position
a tooltip in your UI.
So, feel free to check this out later.
That leads us to position of fixed.
So, fixed and sticky are two that confuse
the living daylights out of me for
the longest time.
I didn't understand the difference.
So I have a couple of videos that
will illustrate the difference here.
So fixed, when you have
an element of position fixed,
it is again removed
from the document flow.
And it's positioned relative to
the containing block that's established by
the viewport.
So what does that mean?
So here is a little video.
Our red box has a position of fixed,
you can see that on line 20 here and
we can go do this in the code pen.
And you'll notice as we scroll it
scrolls with the viewport, right?
So, position fixed, it's gonna be fixed.
20 pixels top,
it's pushed 20 pixels right and down, but
it scrolls with you the entire
viewport width, right?
When it comes to position sticky,
it's very similar.
The difference is, it's going to stop
when its container has reached its end.
So if we go back to our CodePen, and now
instead of fixed we want it to be sticky,
let's code it in real time.
We've got our container.
Let's give it a height.
Let's say height 600 Pixels, right?
We give it a border, so we can see were
that continuous lies, and say 4 pixels
solid block, am also coding live
an the fly, so let's see how this goes.
I wanna be able to wrap this, we gonna
give it div with a class of wrapper,
I am using that mi notation for brevity
here so, bear with me, ignore my spacing.
So now we've got a div
with a class of wrapper.
We'll give the wrapper a background
color so we can see it.
Background, we'll call it light gray,
it's a named color.
And we will give this a height,
let's say, of 400 pixels, okay?
So it doesn't take up the entire,
Container.
Now, instead of fixed, you can see fixed,
it's gonna scroll with the whole thing,
regardless of the bounding container here.
Change this to sticky.
If we change this to sticky,
it's gonna stop when this
container is scrolled out of view.
Let's illustrate that, let's make this
800 so there's a bigger gap, right?
Scrolls and scrolls, it stops and it
scrolls up with the rest of its container.
So that's the difference between fixed and
sticky.
All right, that was the hardest
concept in this whole course, so
if you stuck with me you're golden.